For years people have asked me if there  are any financial Everyday Systems, and of course, given the way I’ve come to approach all my problems, these exist. But I’ve been reluctant to share them because it’s one thing to be risking the bodily health of my listeners with diet and exercise advice, but quite another to be risking their money. This is America, after all.

But given the unprecedented frothiness of the markets, I think it’s time for even diet book authors to start giving investment advice. It can’t be helped. This may be my last chance to be listened to with any interest by anybody on the subject.

So I’m going to share a system I’ve found personally helpful and a few other related thoughts. I call it Spaghetti Western Asset Allocation.

I assume you know the most important thing about investing already, right? That you should just stick all your money in the most boring index funds you can find and then never look at it again until you retire?

Whew. Good. Because it’s exhausting to point out over and over again (as I find I have to, to myself) that almost no one in the entire world beats the markets over time. The few who do, really just a handful in the whole world, ever, are either true financial geniuses like Warren Buffett or they don’t actually beat the markets but just seem to — geniuses of fraud like Bernie Madoff. Professional fund managers who are not dumb and (one would think) spend all their time thinking about beating the market cannot beat the market. They make their hefty salaries from fees and commissions, NOT from beating the market. Even they, the Masters of the Universe, can’t do it and this is their full time job. So why would you, who are not a financial genius, and have a day job and other obligations and interests that have nothing to do with investing, why would you think you can do it in your spare time?

I’m glad you understand this. It is the beginning of financial wisdom. But unfortunately it is only the beginning. Because the difficulty is, that despite intellectually grasping this — it’s not that complicated, it’s kind of obvious — you may still find yourself doing patently idiotic things like picking individual stocks or trying to time the market. Because your lizard brain does not understand it and never will. It thinks you are Warren Buffett. And it will always think you are Warren Buffett. And if you let the lizard brain start acting out its fantasy, the rest of you, and anyone who depends on you, is in for a harsh reality check.

So the challenge becomes a very different one than what you might have naively thought: NOT how do I invest my money so that it gets the best returns, that is a question that will deliver you over to the lizard brain, but rather how do I invest my money so that the lizard brain can’t get at it at all? Or at least, not at the bulk of it?

So maybe investing is not that different from diet after all and I am exactly the right sort of person to be dispensing advice about it. People who are determined to lose weight somehow find themselves in front of the fridge shoveling ice cream into their mouths straight from the carton at two in the morning. It’s not like they don’t know this is a bad idea.

As with diet, as with exercise, as with the other Everyday Systems, we need a psychologically oriented investment system, one that convinces you to do that obviously right but boring thing I mentioned earlier — sticking all your money in the most boring index funds you can find and then never looking at it again until you retire — by appealing to your imagination and getting you to laugh at yourself when you are tempted to do something stupid (or anything at all).

That is what Spaghetti Western Asset Allocation does.

You remember the Spaghetti westerns from the sixties, I hope? They’re stylish and very fun: A Fistful of Dollars, For a Few Dollars More, and of course, The Good, the Bad and the Ugly.

So what do they have to do with investing? Besides having “dollars” in the name, sometimes? (Which, believe it or not, I only just noticed as I was listing them.) Almost nothing, directly. But I’m going to use them, particularly the title of the last one, as an associative scaffold on which to hang some good investing wisdom. And then you just have to call the image to mind, the association with this absurd, over the top genre, and bang, the wisdom will come rushing back to you when you need it in a hurry. We need to be quick on the draw when we find ourselves tempted to be smart aka stupid with our investments.

First off, asset allocation. What does this mean? It literally means, into what buckets do you stick your money, and what share in each. Don’t focus on the individual stocks or bonds, but the  broad categories of stocks or bonds, and make sure they are well balanced. That’s one aspect of asset allocation. The other important aspect is that it’s not about bold individual actions but about the slow patient behavior of keeping these buckets roughly in balance, so mostly non-action. You only do something when one bucket gets out of whack with the others in terms of your target allocation, and then you take some out and put it in another bucket. This is called rebalancing. But as I’ll explain in a bit, even the act of rebalancing is psychologically risky and should be minimized.

So asset allocation, it’s about two things: categories and behaviors; categories vs. individual investments and behaviors vs. individual actions.

What are the buckets themselves? What are the categories? Most asset allocation advice talks about short term, long term, equities, international, small cap, whatever. The buckets are financial categories, types of investments. They’re based on price volatility and expected rates of return. But in Spaghetti Western Asset allocation, the buckets are first and foremost psychological. They’re about how they feel to you, the emotional response they provoke in the lizard brain. Not quite The Good, the Bad and the Ugly, but the Safe, the Boring, and the Crazy.

I’ll start with the Boring. This is the most important bucket, and where most of your money should live. This is stuff that you want to grow over the long term. You don’t mind if it bops up and down a bit or even a lot from day to day. You’re not fantasizing about joining the billionaires club, but you want to be reasonably confident that barring Armageddon, the damn thing will go up by a fair amount over a few decades. So the market as a whole. Obviously. Index funds. That’s the financial part. But what about the psychological part? That’s where the boringness comes in. You need your index fund to be as boring as possible so that you aren’t tempted to diddle with it. You need it to be slap in the face boring, flamboyantly boring. You need to look at it and think, man that is boring. And then you remember, that is the point. You laugh at yourself and you back down from whatever interesting idea popped into your head.

So which index fund? There are thousands! Should you go poring over Morningstar reports and find the broad market index fund with the best historical returns and the most stars? Should you jump from one boring fund to an even more boring fund when you discover it? No. One characteristic of a good boring index fund is that there are a lot of other funds approximately as boring. The most important goal is that you are never tempted to diddle. The quest for perfection, even in boringness, can become such a temptation. Your fund should be just boring enough to powerfully signal “boring.” That is all that is required.

What are the qualities of a suitably boring fund? You need it to be as close as possible to “everything” so you don’t see something in the news and think, “huh, maybe I am Warren Buffett after all and should change something.” So very broad.  It should be an index fund, not actively managed. Because remember, no one can beat the market, so why give active managers their hefty cut. Also people are interesting — steer clear of that! There should be no trace of personality in your boring fund. Even better it should be a fund of index funds, so you don’t worry about overexposing yourself to just one market. And it should be a multi index fund that automatically rebalances between its component funds so you aren’t tempted to do something stupid every time you go in to manually rebalance.

One such fund, the fund I stick over 80% of my money in, is The Fidelity Multi-Asset Index Fund, FFNOX, formerly known as the Four-in-One Index Fund, which was a better name, but possibly not boring enough, so maybe the new name is better. And man, is this fund boring. It checks all the boxes. It’s an autorebalancing fund of index funds, with about half in the US equity funds, a quarter in international large caps, 10% in emerging markets, and 15% in bonds. Other comparably boring funds are the Vanguard LifeStrategy family of funds, the iShares “AO” funds, and target retirement date index funds from a variety of managers (do make sure they are actually index funds, though, the non-index kind can be five times as expensive).

Will FFNOX beat the market? No. It can’t. It is the market, or rather it is its component fund markets. In fact it’s guaranteed to trail those markets ever so slightly because of the small but still not non-existent operating fees. You will not get rich quick investing in FFNOX. But you might find yourself able to retire before you drop from exhaustion. Not just because of its financial characteristics, but most of all because it protects you from the greatest danger to the individual investor: you yourself, your hubris.

You should stick your Boring money into Roth IRAs if you can, regular IRAs or 401ks if you can’t or if you get employer matching, and 529 college funds for your kids. You can even create custodial Roth IRAs for them as soon as they start working. The Roth IRA is such a scam that Peter Thiel, everybody’s favorite James Bond villain billionaire, was worried about the government phasing it out. You might wonder why someone that rich would care about a piddly little Roth ira, with its tiny contribution limits. Well, it turns out his piddly little Roth IRA has over five billion dollars in it. You might not have his evil genius brain, but you can take advantage of his evil genius tax shelter.

Even if none of these are available to you, perhaps because you live in a country with a real social safety net rather than tax shelters for billionaires masquerading as social safety nets, do not despair. The inspiration for Spaghetti Western Asset Allocation is a bunch of movies by Italian directors filmed in Spain, after all. Wherever you live, the tax man is a lot like the lizard brain: mostly dormant until you start transacting. Boring gives them both nothing much to do.

The other two categories of Spaghetti Western Asset Allocation, the Safe and the Crazy, are mostly there to prevent you from dipping into the Boring. They’re there to keep the boring intact and un-messed with. But they do it in opposite ways.

The Safe is a combination of what is sometimes called an emergency fund and just your working pool of ready money to make sure your mortgage and credit card payments (which I’m sure you are paying in full every month) don’t bounce. This should be in cash or close to it. Zero short term risk. I like to keep enough here to make sure I don’t have to worry about any of my autopays going through, with a little bit of buffer to deal with the car or water heater down again and what not, but not much more. I’ve often seen investment advice to keep an unrealistically high amount of money in an emergency fund, to cover a significant period of unemployment, for example, but I feel like if people actually tried to do this they would never have money left over for anything else, and nothing would ever even make it to Boring. The thing about boring is that if you are in a real megacrisis, a real emergency, you CAN tap into it. Even without penalty for your Roth contributions. Not that this is a good idea, but it’s something to keep in mind. If it’s a choice between not funding your Roth and padding your emergency fund, funding your Roth should be a no brainer. Also, having a smaller Safe makes you feel poorer and will curb your spending. Or else all of a sudden it will seem like an emergency to get your kitchen remodelled.  Excess cash sitting around will be spent. It’s the first law of financial thermodynamics.

As my Boring has grown, Safe has become a smaller and smaller proportion of my total asset allocation. I try to keep it to the smallest amount required to keep me from having to dip into Boring.

And now we come to the Crazy. This is the concession to your lizard brain. This is the ritual sacrifice that you make to it so that it will spare Boring, the small percentage of your money that you allocate to play acting that you are Warren Buffett. You should consider this money lost. Hopefully it won’t be, entirely, but even if it is, it will have served a very valuable purpose: protecting the bulk of your money, which is in Boring, and showing you graphically how wise you were to preserve it from your foolishness there. So it’s good if you lose some money in Crazy. It‘s edifying. It would be dangerous if you did actually beat the markets here. Because then you might start having delusions of grandeur. Fortunately that is a danger you are unlikely to experience for any significant length of time.

How much should you allocate to crazy?

You should aspire to allocate about the same proportion as that of vermouth to Gin that Winston Churchill was said to prefer in his Martinis: “a whisper.” The story, almost certainly apocryphal, but too good to not keep repeating, is that he would uncork a bottle of vermouth, hold it over his martini, whisper the word “vermouth” without pouring in any liquid at all, and then pop the cork back on again. So essentially his martini was just a big glass of gin.

You should aspire. But if you can’t achieve quite “a whisper,” (I can’t), keep it as small as possible. Remember, it’s gone. It’s a sacrifice. Hopefully not actually, but that’s how you should view it. It should be the smallest amount required to keep the lizard brain off your case about tapping into Boring. That’s an important role — it needs to be fulfilled. So don’t put less than is required for this, lest the starved lizard brain start helping itself. But my experience is that a great deal is not required to appease it. Not much money, and not much time, to prove to myself yet again, that I am still no Warren Buffett.

Over time, my crazy has not only become smaller and smaller compared to my boring, it’s also become less crazy. These days my delusions of financial brilliance center more around hedging against the ai bubble than riding it even harder, so my crazy is in value funds and even an intermediate bond fund. It’s not enough money to actually be much of a hedge, but I will feel slightly less dumb when things collapse, and if they don’t for a while, at least I will have gotten my foolishness vented on a small scale rather than a large one.

That’s all for today. And now to get this episode out quickly before that AI bubble bursts… I may not believe in market timing, but I do believe in comic timing: no one is going to want to hear stock tips from their barber, or their diet guru, however amusingly formulated, the day after a crash.
