Last episode, I talked about Rule Burden, how having all these OCD-seeming Everyday Systems rules can actually make life easier and more pleasant, because it reduces the stress of decision burden and increases your appreciation and even enjoyment of what one might otherwise call the daily grind. Any stress in having to remember and abide by these rules is more than counterbalanced by these benefits.

But as one attentive listener pointed out (danke, Stefan!), that’s well and good for systems that are simply swaps for unregulated behavior, that replace one set of actions or attitudes with another, order for disorder, good use of time for bad use of time, but what about systems that actually take extra time, that have you do something that you were not previously doing in any way, shape or form?

Now all the Everyday Systems, even those that do take time, are time efficient. That’s an important design principle. Shovelglove, for example, famously takes only 14 minutes of "schedulistically insignificant time.” But still, 14 minutes is not nothing. And if you are practicing several such systems, it adds up, it isn’t so insignificant anymore. 

It’s another dimension of the exact same question I asked last time: cumulatively, how can that not be too much system? Not in terms of rules, but in terms of time. I call it this similar but (to my mind) distinct problem task burden as opposed to rule burden. That’s what I am going to talk about today. And I’m going to address this problem of task burden by describing a concrete system that I’ve alluded to before in passing but never devoted an entire episode to, or mentioned by name. I’ve been practicing and refining it for several years now, and it’s time for the full reveal.

Task burden is the weight of the (effectively) infinite things you have to do in the finite time that is available to you. Systems can add to your task burden, systems that take time. But systems are not the only things that take time. Other things you have to do, errands, work assignments, anything that takes time are also competing with them for your limited time and attention. You have to consider all of these things together. 

The naive self-help guru will tell you that somehow, with their approach, you can fit it all in. Or at least, the important stuff. It’s just a matter of implementational efficiency. Of organizing your efforts.

The more advanced self-help guru sees that this is hopeless and that the most important thing to do is to acknowledge and accept this hopelessness. Not only can we not get it all done, or even the important stuff, but we don’t even have sufficient time to figure out what the most important stuff is. First things first, and the zeroth thing is to figure out the first thing, but even that can take forever.

On one level, this resignation is the wiser approach. But you know, I still need to get the kids to school on time. And most of us have other people who depend on us: families, kids, friendships, at work – real responsibilities. We can’t just abandon these to zen out and become monks or hermits, living in the NOW and accepting our finitude. 

So we need a synthesis. We need to somehow “get stuff done,” some stuff, enough stuff, while simultaneously accepting that on some important level it is utterly impossible. 

I’ve talked about this tension before: in Time Box Lord, in Aristotelian Self-Portrait, in Clock and Calendar your sword and shield, in Allocation Mind.

But in this episode, I’m going to describe a concrete system that brings a lot of these ideas together, in a way that can help you manage task burden, both practically and metaphysically. I call it Aristocal, or Aristotelian self portrait in the medium of the calendar. Although as I’ll discuss in a minute, Allocal, or Allocation mind in the calendar, or Retrocal – retroactive calendar – might have also been good names for it. They’re certainly good names for aspects of it. But “Aristo” honors the initial inspiration, and it also means best in Greek, so I figure I might as well stick with the first and best name.

In a nutshell, Aristocal involves using an electronic calendar, either google calendar or microsoft outlook or whatever you prefer, to map out, not just events and meetings, but also your personal habits and tasks. It helps you both do, and accept what you can’t do, by getting it all out in front of you, as much as will fit, like the No S Diet does with food on a plate. You see if your tasks will fit on the plate of your calendar.

One thing that is terribly confusing about working with calendar apps is the terminology. The word “calendar” is used for three distinct things. One, it’s used for the program itself, MicroSoft Outlook or Google Calendar whatever Apple calls their thing. Two, it’s used for the scaffolding of time that you lay events on, the actual timeline, the months and years and days and minutes. Three it’s also used for groups of events, the stuff that you overlay on the timeline. By default, in a calendar app, you have one group of events, all of your events are in the same group. But, as I’ll explain in a minute, a key mechanism of Aristocal is making multiple groups of events. So I have to make sure to distinguish between these three very different meanings of the word “calendar” or you are going to have no idea what I am talking about. I’m going to try to be careful to use the words app, timeline, and event group, instead of just “calendar.”

Aristocal has three core ideas:

1. Calendar as Ledger:  by starting at the level of time, and then divvying it up, rather than starting from a list of tasks, you are forced to be more realistic about what you can accomplish. If you start with a separate todo app for your tasks, there’s this disconnect between your tasks and the time you actually have available, and you quickly lose touch with reality. It’s like trying to balance your budget when you have your income in one app, and your expenses in another. By putting it all in the calendar, you can balance your time budget much more effectively. It’s also a lot simpler. Only one app, a relatively straight forward app that you are no doubt using already, vs. a second app for task management, probably an overcomplicated app that you keep on changing and having to re-learn because every five minutes some newer and cooler task management app is coming out. This is the allocation mind aspect of Aristocal: Todo listing with the focus on allocating your limited time. If it doesn’t fit, mourn it and move on. 

It won’t all fit. And it might take you a few weeks or months or years or lifetimes to fully grok this. But the sooner you start, the sooner it will start to sink in, both on a practical “work with it” level, and (hopefully) on a spiritual acceptance level. 

What part of your life should you allocate like this? Not all of it. I think that would be full-on psychotic and not just borderline OCD. I stick with work hours on work days and my pre-work morning routines. Evenings and weekends and S-days I leave open or at least full of gaps. I’ll stick regular calendar events in there like if we’re going to see a show or something and even some habits as I’ll discuss in a minute, but it’s not the full accounting ledger. It’s important to have some time off the books, to breathe. And not just an event that says “breathe,” as the OCD part of me is tempted to do, but no events at all.

2: Calendar as Self-Portrait: The other core element of Aristocal is that in addition to events and meetings and todos, you stick your habits and routines in there as recurring events. Anything that takes time needs to be accounted for, on one level, simply for budgeting purposes, along with your other tasks. Does it fit, all these wonderful habits you want to start practicing? Can you afford, timewise, to commit to them? When? Can you balance the books? So far, this sounds a lot like the ledger I just described. But it’s also, with these habits and routines especially, an exercise for self-knowledge. As Aristotle supposedly said (actually Will Durant), “you are what you repeatedly do.” So what do you repeatedly do? Get it in the calendar. Look at it. That’s you. That’s who you are. That’s your Aristotelian self-portait. 

3: Calendar as Diary. The last core element of Aristocal is that as your calendar moves from the past to the present to the future, you move your entries around to record what actually happened. If a meeting was cancelled or rescheduled, delete or drag it somewhere else. If you missed your shovelglove session, ditto. Leave no task behind. If it didn’t happen, move it to the future or delete it. Your calendar is not just a plan for the future, but becomes a record of the past. This is helpful both to teach you to become a better planner, because it’s a little painful to have to redrag and remove stuff, a tiny little pavlovian pain signal, productive negative feedback, but also provides a helpful record you can come back to consult, a sort of diary in the calendar. As you get better at Aristocal, most events will actually happen as planned, so you won't wind up dragging or deleting much. That makes it a pretty cheap 'side effect' diary. I call this aspect of it retrocal, or retroactive calendar. You start with a calendar about the future, and bonus, you get a diary about the past.

That’s it. The three pillars of Aristocal: Ledger, Self-Portrait and Diary.  All in all, it’s a simple idea, but there are some technical finesses that I find critical to making it work. There are three of these too, these finesses, though they don’t line up with the three pillars.

The first technical finesse is making non-blocking event groups.

What does this mean? Normally, when you create an event in your calendar app, it’s in the default event group, and marks the time it takes as busy time. That means it shows up in your calendar in the default color and if someone tries to make a meeting with you, the time is blocked off and shows as busy.

This makes perfect sense for work meetings. You want to block off your availability and communicate it to your coworkers. We’d spend half our lives trying to find available meeting times without these blocking events.

But for private habits and tasks that are just you and have some flexibility about rescheduling, you want to get them in the calendar so you can budget for them, and remind yourself of them, but because it’s just you, and you can be more flexible about moving them, you don’t want them to show up as blocking tasks that prevent people from scheduling meetings with you. This way you can map out your entire day without becoming unreachable to your coworkers. 

So in addition to my regular, default, blocking work event group, I create a non blocking work event group, and a non blocking life event group. Each has a different color so I can see at a glance what my work life balance is. If I have a life event, say a doctor's appointment or parent teacher meeting or lunch with a friend during working hours, that stays a blocking work event to stave off meetings, but I mark it as “out of the office” for visual clarity. I have a further non-blocking event group called “procrastination” which I apply retroactively if I wound up just wasting time during Aristocal hours, but I really never have to use this anymore. It’s not that I don’t ever procrastinate anymore, just that it’s rarely of this unplanned kind. See my episode on ProPro for more on that. When I procrastinate intentionally like that, in a planned, logged way, I count it as a regular non-blocking life task. Still, I keep this “procrastination” event group around as a punitive threat just in case I’m ever tempted to backslide. 

So that was the first finesse: create non-blocking event groups. I find non-blocking work and non-blocking life the most helpful even groups. But maybe other categories will occur to you.

The second finesse is sizing your events for draggability. Ideally, you would schedule your events for the exact time you planned to do them, and there would be only one event scheduled at a time. But calendar apps make it very hard to read thin events, events that take very little time, and they make it even harder to drag them around –  you try to grab one to drag and drop and all of a sudden you have resized it and control-z doesn’t even work to size it back.

The solution? Make a compromise with the reality of how calendar apps are built and design your events for draggability. Keep them a size that allows for easy reading and dragging (for most events, 30 minutes seems to be the sweet spot), even if this means 10 or 15 minute events become 30 minute events. Just stick them next to each other in the same timeslot, so it appears they are happening simultaneously. You won’t really do them simultaneously; when you get to this block, you will do them all one after another. At least that is the idea. It would be nice if calendar apps let you set a left to right order for such  events so you could indicate a sequential order within this slot, but they don’t. At least as far as I can see.

Generally speaking, the only time I will size an event smaller than 30 minutes is if someone has scheduled an event for 45 minutes and I have a gap to fill. Aesthetically I don’t like to see any gaps in the Aristocal portion of my day.

But I don’t stress about down to the minute accuracy. If my event scheduled for 9-9:30 went on till 9:35 it’s fine. If I don’t get to an activity at all within its allotted block then I move it to reflect reality better, but otherwise I don’t fuss over it. Just as we don’t fuss over calories on the No S Diet, we don’t fuss over minutes here. 

The third finesse is calendaring in the calendar. The process itself takes time and you need to budget for that. So your first work event every work day should be the meta event of getting the rest of that days events in order, taking a first pass over allocating all your tasks to your available time that day, pushing out to future days what doesn’t fit, moving or deleting events that didn’t actually happen yesterday. I budget half an hour for this, which seems a lot, but I usually wind up needing it. It takes some hard thinking, coming up with the battle plan for the day, reviewing yesterday, and deciding what to push out the future. As with any other tasks, the planning task goes into the calendar, as a recurring event, first thing every work day.

Another reason scheduling the calendar planning session first thing is valuable is that it pushes you into productive thinking right away. It doesn’t give you a chance to get distracted by emails or news feeds or social media. And then once your plan is in place, you see that you don’t really have much time for these things. Distractions will still happen, and you will go off-plan, but the plan provides some helpful friction to keep them at a minimum. With the day's events fully and beautifully laid out, you really don’t want to have to insert a procrastination block in there, pushing something else out of the way. 

That’s it, Aristocal, three conceptual pillars, three technical finesses, and three confusing uses of the word calendar disambiguated. 

I’ve been practicing Aristocal for a little over three years now and here are a few things I’ve learned in the process.

One thing I’ve noticed is that the earlier I schedule something during the day, the likelier it is to get done. This is both because I have more time to reschedule it if something else comes up, but even more because those hours tend to be more in my control and something else is less likely to come up. The hour and change before anyone else in my family is  awake is a time when I usually can’t be interrupted. I make sure that this is when my top priority routines happen.

Another thing I’ve noticed is that putting habits in the calendar is helpful not just to budget for them, but to actually build them as habits. By doing the same things, at the same time, in the same order every N day, as specified in the calendar, I associate each activity with the other neighbor activities and one starts to lead naturally to the next.

Another thing I’ve had to learn how to weather is those days when reality just punches you in the face and very little goes according to plan. I try to anticipate these days when possible, I think of them as emergency days, another category beyond N and S days. When I do know in advance, or at least early in the day, that (say) we’re going to be in the ER for who knows how long, I can try to squeeze in an homage version of at least some my habits, say, three minutes of something instead of seven, and push other stuff to the future, moving “tub and toilet” Tuesday (unsatisfyingly) to Wednesday. I try to be cheerfully flexible, practice defense in depth, get a “first responder” adrenaline kick of triaging what I reduce, defer or just skip.

But sometimes I just have to accept that reality had other ideas for me that day. Then I try to record what actually happened as best I can to at least get the retroactive diary benefit, but refrain from flagellating myself if I can’t even do this. I give myself spider hunter spider points if I noticed it was painful, and spider hunter bonus points for hopefully accepting it with a good grace.

If you’re listening to this rather than reading, thank you, first off, because that’s the primary way I hope people will experience this podcast. I like to think there’s something I convey with my voice that doesn’t make it to the transcript, a less lossy if slower form of transmission. But for this episode I do have a visual in the transcript that might be good to consult: a couple of screenshots from my own actual Aristocal.

The first screenshot is in work week view on my computer, Monday through Friday, which is usually the view I use. When I took this screenshot it was Wednesday morning, so Wednesday is thicker than the other columns and you can see a little black line marking what time it was. It’s pretty busy. Broadway boogie woogie. There are hundreds of events. It might seem crazy. But if you think about it, most of our lives are sufficiently complicated that if you captured it in a calendar, it would look like this. I don’t know if I’m doing more, or much more. But I think I’m making better choices about what I’m doing. At the very least I feel better about them. 

I’ve also included a screenshot of a single day on my phone outlook app. It works quite nicely in this view as well, at least to look at. 

Why do I use Microsoft calendar? Because that is what I have to use for work. And that’s where the bulk of the non-negotiable blocking events I have to work around have to live. I need to massage my habits and other life tasks around these, so that’s where it makes sense to operate. I also have a google calendar which I use to communicate personal events with my family. If there is a family event that falls during the work day, or a work event that takes place outside of my usual work hours, I will invite myself on the other calendar to make sure I budget for and communicate it in both places. I recommend doing Aristocal in whatever calendar app you have to use for work, which feels weird, because a lot of the events are personal and private, but if you stick them in another calendar app then you have to keep both of them open all the time during the work day, the ledger is going to be too hard to balance.

The last thing I’ll mention, just briefly, is personal punch cards, the index card based task management system I have been practicing for many years and am more addicted to than ever. You may wonder how these fit into Aristocal. There is certainly a lot of redundancy. I write my tasks on the cards, I write the same tasks on the calendar. At least in part, they are two expressions of the same thing that I keep in sync. Why? Why this redundant effort? Why not just pick one? It’s a good question. But the answer is a little involved, and since this episode is long enough already, I think I will defer my answer until I revisit personal punch cards later in another episode hopefully later this year. For now, I’ll just say, yes, it’s partly redundant, but it’s good redundancy, like that extra engine on an airplane. It’s redundancy that helps me stay on course even through severe turbulence.

When I look at my Aristocal, one thing that is inescapable is that there isn’t time for anything else. Every moment, at least on N-days until after work, is allocated. If I want to do something else, I have to give up something for it. That may be worth it, but I cannot pretend there is no cost. Something is always going to be neglected, it’s just a question of what. Am I neglecting the right things? That is the question I ask myself, instead of getting bummed out by the fact that I neglected anything at all, which is a given. 

One thing I am happy I did not neglect today, is finishing this podcast. I hope you found it useful or interesting or at least entertaining. Thanks for listening.
