Hi, this is Reinhard from Everyday Systems.


The No S Diet is a system for managing dietary excess, the problem of eating too much. Simple excess is not the only problem related to diet, but for most people, it’s the biggest one by far. For that reason the No S Diet is the foundation of my approach to diet and I think something like it should be the foundation of most people’s approach. The No S Diet is all about moderation, that’s the solution it proposes to excess, systematic moderation, and accordingly, it’s a very humane system, it doesn’t demand too much. It’s simple; it intentionally avoids corner cases. And it’s focused; it avoids related but different problems like nutrition.


But sometimes people find that the No S Diet is too moderate, too humane. They like the idea of the No S Diet, and maybe it works for them a little, but they feel like they need more, and they wonder, what else can I do? Is there something extra I can layer on top of it?


Or maybe they feel like the corner cases that the No S Diet avoids are actually kind of important. Or that there are enough of these corner cases that they need more guidance. The definition of a sweet for example. They feel lost without more explicit rules.


Or they can’t shake the constant bombardment of messages about nutrition. They stress about whether or not they are getting enough polyphenols or adaptogens or pre-biotics or whatever the next trendy micronutrient is. The “side effect” of single plate meals gently nudging you to make those plates better both gastronomically and nutritionally does not feel like enough with these nutritionalist air raid sirens going off all the time.


If any or all of these are concerns of yours, there is a system that can help, in a sane and moderate way, without messing with the core simplicity of No S, without piling on more of that “rule burden” I’ve been talking about in recent episodes and risking the solid foundation of your No S habits. You can practice this system alongside No S or independently. I call it Intelligent Dietary Defaults, IDDs for short.


It’s not a new system. Not at all. I first described it in episode 23, way back in 2007, so 19 years ago now, and also in the No S Diet book. But I think an update is in order, for three reasons:


1) to frame it more solidly as a safe, supplemental tool to help if you think vanilla No S isn’t quite doing the trick for you – a tool that does not risk the foundation of your No S Habits by adding extra, unsustainable rule burden


2) because I’ve further refined my original examples and come up with some new defaults over the past almost 20 years that I’d like to share with you. 


3) because it’s possible, I suppose, that some of you may not have listened to all my podcast episodes or immersed yourself in the study of the No S Diet book and so IDDs may be completely new to you and you will be hearing about them for the first time now.


OK, so what is an intelligent default, in general? I’m sure you’ve heard this term. It comes up most frequently in the context of computer software. When you use an app, or website, or any kind of computer program, there are a million different preferences that can be set: what the background should be, or the ring tone, or what incomprehensible messages about “cookies” it should give you. There are a million of these and you can set them a million different ways but the first time you go there, these choices have to have been made for you, at least provisionally. Otherwise every time you went to a new web site or used a new app you’d be spending three days configuring everything. An intelligent default is a reasonable default setting that a user can override, but most of the time won’t because it makes a good amount of sense for most people most of the time.


There's an analogous idea from government policy. It’s a movement called soft paternalism. Instead of forcing people to do what is best for them (that would be hard paternalism), like putting money in their retirement accounts, you keep it optional, but you make the smart thing—putting a bunch of money into the retirement account instead of nothing—the default. Historically the defaults here have been pretty dumb. People had to explicitly choose to put money in or nothing went in. Making the default smart, doesn't deprive people of any freedom, they're still just as free to override the default, it just makes the choice of not choosing (which is where most people wind up) a better one. There is always a default, why not make it a good one?


So this is a powerful idea, and not just with computers. How does it work with diet?


An Intelligent Dietary Default is when you look for certain common food situations in your life in which your current unthinking defaults are pretty bad and then you identify better ones. And then you make sure that you have those better ones conveniently available when you need them so that you really don’t have to think or struggle when the situation comes up. Intelligent in the case of diet, means presumably something healthy, though there are other goods besides health, that you will also want to take into account -- like cost, taste, variety – and above all, convenience. An intelligent default is a default that balances these concerns well.


When we actively think, most of us are capable of making good dietary decisions. We intellectually understand, it’s not that hard. But most of the time we're being harried by a million external pressures, and at any given moment diet is (quite reasonably) pretty low down on our list of concerns. The kids have to get on the school bus. We have to do this work thing or we’ll be fired. These things are in that moment unquestionably more important than diet. Then in that rush, that necessary rush, we unthinkingly reach for whatever is most convenient — and that tends to be pretty horrible. We just don’t have the energy or attention to spare to make a better decision. Any one instance of this happening is not such a big deal but over time it adds up to a big problem. Now, you can bemoan this state of affairs, but unthinking reflex eating is more or less a fact of life. It’s a survival mechanism. We can try to eat more mindfully, but to a large extent it's pretty hopeless. What we can do is to make it so that the convenient thing we unthinkingly reach for in situations like this—the default—is reasonably healthy. Or at least, a little healthier.


Step one is targeting the problem situation. When are these bad automatic decisions happening? What are your current bad defaults in common food situations? That part is usually pretty easy. Just think back over the last week. If you’re having trouble doing this, FLOG for a bit, keep a temporary food log, and look it over. You don’t have to track calorie counts or anything. Just briefly list the foods you ate. My bet is at least something jumps out at you.


Step two is identifying a replacement default. One trick to doing this effectively is to accept the fact that you're going to have to compromise between competing concerns. The healthiest things are in many cases not very convenient, or cheap enough for routine consumption, or you may find them utterly disgusting. This system isn’t about winning a medal for the most theoretically virtuous default for some abstract person. It’s about you, and the reality of your particular problems and preferences, and about making things not perfect but a little better for you. It’s about compromise, and balance, and a multidimensional, individualized “good enough.” And a legitimate and necessary part of that equation is that you don’t hate it. You can’t feel resistance when the trigger circumstance happens. You don’t have to be excited about your default, just not repulsed by it, or it will never become a default, you will never automatically reach for it.


The other trick is not to force yourself into eating this stuff every time. Default doesn't mean obligatory. It doesn’t mean always. It just means what you do when nothing better comes along. And that “better” doesn't have to be healthier, it can be socially better, like a group lunch, or gastronomically better, like a delicious meal at a fancy restaurant. That’s OK! These are also good things. Diet is not the only good in life. The default is for when you are in an unthinking rush — which is a lot of the time, for most of us. And our existing default foods tend to be HORRIBLE—fast food, ultraprocessed food, cheap, convenient and not at all healthy. So swapping a frequent “terrible” for a frequent “OK,”, adds up, over time, to a lot of good. It doesn’t have to be perfect, and it doesn’t have to be always, and in fact it shouldn’t be these things because then it isn’t going to be at all.


What does making something a default mean? Normally defaults just happen to us. We just fall into them. How do we intentionally make something a new default?


As I’ve said, it does not mean more rules. It does not mean a requirement. You don’t have to eat the default every time. But it does mean something beyond a vague good intention.


It means, once you’ve decided what your problem situation is, and once you’ve identified your new replacement default, that you make sure it is conveniently available when you want it. You pave the way to it so that it’s easy and available and springs to mind and to hand. You want to make it so that it’s less work to reach for it than for an unhealthy alternative: that it’s around, that you know how to prepare it, that it doesn’t take much time or effort. 


I call this part of building an IDD convenience engineering. And it’s most of the actual work of this system. In fact all the work involved in practicing this system is basically pre-work. If there’s in-the-moment work, when your arm is reaching for something, if there’s an effort, then you haven’t really made it a default. Your arm should naturally reach for the default. Because if it is a good default, if you don’t hate it and it’s conveniently available, that’s what your arm should automatically do. You shouldn’t have to force it. Maybe just a tiny bit in the beginning while you’re establishing the association between circumstance and new default. 


So what does this whole process look like? What are some examples of IDDs? With their Problem targeting, replacement identification and convenience engineering “pre work” steps?


I’m going to discuss eight specific IDDs that I have practiced or am currently practicing. They are highly personal, tuned to my particular tastes and circumstances. The point is not so much that you use them out of the box, as is, (I mean, maybe! It’s possible) but that they serve as concrete examples of the process for you to come up with your own. Because there is a lot of overlap in the principles and I’ll try to avoid repeating myself too much, the last few will be considerably more concise that the first ones. So don’t worry. The first few are whoppers but then it goes quicker.


________________




IDD #1: “optimize your oatmeal.” This is the original IDD, the mother of them all. I don’t practice it exactly like I described in 2007 anymore, but it illustrates the principles in action really well, and was helpful for many years in its original form, so I’m going to give it to you again now, more or less as I did then. Defaults can evolve. That’s an important point too. So I’ll use this as an example to illustrate that as well: how I optimize my oatmeal differently now under different circumstances, and what I do instead to solve the quick lunch in the office problem that I was initially responding to. 


So: "optimize your oatmeal." As with full-blown Everyday Systems, it can be helpful to give your default a catchy and evocative name. It helps it spring to mind in the appropriate circumstances. 


Like “dietary defaults,” “optimize” is another computery term. On one level, its meaning is obvious, "to make better." But it also, in computer science at least, has the connotation of "optimize for what?" There's this implied question. And there's a whole science of optimization that has to do with managing and balancing competing concerns, figuring out what tradeoffs to make to get the most net benefit. 


So it’s a good name. Not only does it spring to mind, but it reminds me of this important consideration.


What is the problem situation it addresses? I’m at work, in the office, and I am tempted to eat out for lunch every day and spend a lot of money on hypercaloric restaurant food. Or I have to spend a lot of time and mental energy in the morning lunch prep process to bring to work. Or I scrounge a cheap and quick lunch of sorts from the crap in the vending machines. 


What replacement did I identify for these suboptimal defaults? 


Oatmeal. Rolled oats. Normally a breakfast food, but I decided it was perfect for lunch. I would pour some oatmeal in a bowl, mix in some kind of nuts, some kind of seeds, and some kind of dried fruits. There was variety within these three categories but always these three categories. Then I went to the hot water spigot by the coffee machine and covered it with hot water. By the time I was back at my desk it was ready to eat. The oats didn’t really cook much. They just got sort of warmed up and a little softened. I liked them this way. It gave me something to chew on. 


So, why? What were the competing concerns this system was balancing?


First, time: It was regular rolled oats, not instant, because I like the chewy texture of regular rolled oats better, but the way I prepared it was more or less instant. Most of the prep time was walking back and forth to the hot water spigot. It was so quick in fact that I could have  a good 45 minutes left over on my lunch break to walk around outside and practice urban ranger. 


Resources: I didn't have to store anything in the nasty communal refrigerator at work. All the ingredients are dry, I could buy them way in advance, and store them in a drawer at my desk. I didn’t even have to use the nasty communal microwave, because the hot water spigot did all the heating for me. At home I've got all these great resources: a full kitchen, a non-nasty communal refrigerator (well, it's kind of nasty, but it's my own family’s nastiness at least), an oven, pots, pans. I might as well save the resource intensive eating (which I do like!) for when I actually have these resources, and the quick convenient stuff for when I don't.


Money: Oatmeal is cheap. They feed this stuff to horses. Oatmeal is basically horse food. It’s provender. It’s cheaper than cat food. Yes, the dried fruits and nuts I’d add to it are more expensive, but not all that much goes into each bowl, so we're still talking maybe a dollar a day for lunch.


Health: Oatmeal is healthy. It's a whole grain. It's relatively unprocessed. Maybe the steel cut kind would be even better than my rolled oats, even less processed, but it loses too many points on convenience. I tried it. It tends to explode in the microwave, which does not endear you to the communal kitchen crowd. Dried fruit may not be as healthy as fresh fruit, but hey, it's still fruit. And I have plenty of fresh fruit with other meals, as I’ll explain in a minute, when I come to my next default. We’re not going for standalone perfection of each ingredient. We’re going for the best compromise.


Taste: Oatmeal with seeds, nuts, and dried fruit tastes reasonably good. It's not the most delicious thing in the world, but it's OK. Yes, it would taste better if I cooked it properly in a pot and poured in some cream or slathered it with butter, but again, consider the convenience and consider the circumstances. Does it get too monotonous? Not if you vary the fruits, seeds, and nuts.


Stopping power: Oatmeal is filling. It's like eating cement. The first time you prepare oatmeal like this you won't be able to finish it because you'll have made too much. No S dieters in particular pay attention here: if you eat oatmeal for lunch, you will not be hungry until dinner time.


Convenience: Oatmeal prepared this way is also easy to store and have on hand. In terms of convenience engineering, all I had to do was make sure I kept a good stash of rolled oats, dried fruit, seeds and nuts in a drawer of my desks in my office, ensuring that it was easier than any other possible lunch option. No fridge or microwave required. And the ingredients keep for weeks, even months or longer unopened. They’re minimally processed but shelf stable. 


I mentioned already that I don’t still practice precisely this version of optimize your oatmeal anymore, although I did for over a decade. I didn’t stop because I got tired of it, but because my circumstances changed. I no longer work in an office 5 days a week. Working from home, mostly, I don’t have to worry about the nasty communal fridge and so on. I still eat a lot of oatmeal, but now I optimize for different things. I eat it mostly for breakfast. And I eat it mostly with my teenage son, whose palate requires a few more concessions to tastiness than mine does. So I usually cook it on the stove in whole milk, and add some brown sugar and maple syrup and fresh fruit. I still always include a fruit, a nut, a seed. It’s pretty delicious, if not quite as virtuous as my former hot water no added sugar version, but still, pretty solid on the health front, and much better than many alternatives a teenage boy might reach for.


IDD #2: B.Y.O.S. (Bring Your Own Sweetener). This default is, instead of buying presweetened yogurt, cereal, or peanut butter, you buy the unsweetened kind and add your own sugar or honey or maple syrup or jam. Don’t put a hard limit on how much sweetener you can put in, just observe; that observation by itself will provide an effective limit. I don’t care how sweet you like it, there’s no way you’re going to watch yourself spoon in as much sugar as the manufacturer would invisibly have done for you. After two, three, four spoonfuls you’ll be too embarrassed to continue adding more, and you’ll probably find that it tastes just fine. For reference a can of coke has 10 teaspoons of sugar. Remember that the no sweets rule does allow you to eat some sugar, so this is completely legitimate. It’s another example of how merely forcing yourself to see excess can be an effective way of limiting it. For yogurt, probably my most frequent BYOS vehicle, buy plain and add your own jam. This also means you can buy the best yogurt, in bigger containers, which is a better value and less bad for the environment than the usual single serving stuff, and also the best jam, and also, though I am not personally worried about this, you can avoid the ultraprocessed ingredients that result from manufacturers putting the jam and the yoghurt in the same container. There’s no guar gum, for example, in most plain yoghurt, but it’s pretty much always in flavored. Though maybe that’s a disadvantage, if you are one of those who consider guar gum a superfood (guar gum has the rare distinction of simultaneously being a marker of ultraprocessing and a trendy superfood). But believe it or not you can buy that and add it separately too. You can get packets of guar gum on amazon. So BYOGG too if that’s your thing. 


IDD #3: Fruit shrine. Increased visibility can work both ways. We’ve talked about how it can discourage you from eating bad stuff, but it can also encourage you to eat healthier foods. One way of doing this is to always keep a prominently visible plate of fresh fruit on your counter or table. By not hiding your fruit out of sight, out of mind, deep in the bowels of your refrigerator, you’ll remember to reach for it instead of less healthy stuff, and it will be obvious when your supply needs replenishing. If you’re worried about your fruit shrine rotting at room temperature, there’s a positive side to that: incentive to buy more frequently and fresher, and fresher means healthier, instead of hoarding in bulk. Plus you’ll have plenty of time to see what’s turning overripe since it’s all out in the open. I find I’ve been throwing away a lot less fruit since I’ve been practicing this technique. Unrefrigerated fruit often tastes better—in some cases, there are warnings against refrigerating on the box or sticker. I’m sure you’ve all heard the Chiquita banana song. There are exceptions – certainly large fruit once you’ve butchered or split it needs to go in the fridge, or if you want to arrest the ripening process of elements of your fruit shrine that have hit peak. But mostly, for most fruit, keeping it out in the open together makes sense on multiple levels. 


Fruit is beautiful, visually. There’s a reason it figures so prominently in all those old master still lifes. The fruit shrine in my home is one of those three level ceiling hangers. The crown is usually a glorious pineapple, with the best head of hair that I can find. I’ve read this is a sign of a healthy, taste specimen and in any case it’s a beautiful thing. It’s a nice bonus of fruit shrine that you basically get this free old master painting thrown in. 


Fruit shrine, the construction of this inspirational architectural marvel, requires whole fruit: not the pre-cut kind, which can't survive outside the fridge, turns to mush inside it in a day or two, and costs way more. So you have to know how to prepare it, how to cut it up and butcher it. Acquiring that knowledge is part of the pre-work. I'm surprised by how many people don't seem to know even how to core and slice an apple, for example, never mind a pineapple, or a mango, or an avocado. If you don't feel confident about what you are doing, look it up, find a video on YouTube. Don’t be insecure if you don’t know how to deal with whole fruit yet, or annoyed at the prospect of having to learn. Get fired up by the challenge. It's not that hard, and figuring it out is a great investment. Think of how much it’s going to open up to you.  And try to have a sense of humor about the fruit you're inevitably going to mangle in the learning process.


Then there’s a bit of a mental paradigm shift you have to make, especially if you’re on the No S Diet. You have to start thinking of fruit as meal food. As something that you have with your meals. Maybe even as a central component of some meals. Not as a snack you have between them. At first this may feel odd, but get over it. Do it a few times and it will start to feel natural. If it feels jarring to put it on the plate with the rest of your meal put it next to the plate, so you still see it all at once and it factors into your visual meal heft calculation.


I will often cut up a small plate of fruit to stick next to my plate with a little canister of toothpicks next to it. Big enough to share if I can tempt anyone else in my family to share, but small enough that I could finish it all myself if they are not actually tempted. I keep my main plate small enough to compensate for all this fruit. “Fruit kebab” is how I market this to others and myself. 


Big fruit like pineapple or melon, after letting them ripen and work their visual magic in the fruit shrine, I’ll stick in the fridge once I’ve cut into it. Big chunks I’ll just wrap in aluminum foil. It lasts longer in big chunks than if you cut it up small right away.


If you’re doing No S, you will come to appreciate the legitimate sweetness of fruit in a way you likely never have before. I’ve really come to love fruit as opposed to seeing it as some virtuous consolation prize for a sweet I’d really rather be having. I feel like this is what everyday sweet is supposed to taste like, and I’ve come to really hunger for it.


Fruit shrine isn’t just for immediate eating. When I do go into the office for lunch, usually just one day a week these days, I’ll pack fresh fruit and a small tupperware of nuts or seeds. That’s it. Maybe a banana, a mandarin, an apple and a mini container of roasted salted cashews. That's my lunch. Three pieces of fruit and a handful of nuts. Super convenient, super healthy, and in the context of my solid breakfast and dinner, sufficiently filling. Hand fruit like this is nature’s own convenient food. Portable, resilient, it comes in its own protective package of skin or peel. 


I enjoy this fruit and nut meal so much, it’s so quick and delicious and visually appealing, that sometimes I’ll have it even if I’m not eating lunch in the office. 


IDD #4: Black Bread Breakfast. This is when I want something quick for breakfast with a good punch of fiber. I’ll buy a brick of European whole grain bread like Mestemacher or Trader Joe’s Danish Vollkornbrot and smear on a little cheese or tinned fish or pate. Inspired by Westphalian pumpernickel, this isn’t some concoction out of a lab but a traditional food that just happens to be healthy and convenient. Sprinkle a little parsley or fresh herbs or a dollop of mustard to take it to the next level. I usually pop it in the toaster for a few minutes but depending on what you’re optimizing for you can skip that. Packs a punch, full of fiber, easy to prepare and have on hand. It’s got oatmeal-level stopping power. I joke that it’s like eating cardboard–but I actually like it. 


IDD #5: Whole (week) grains. As anyone who cooks knows, starches tend to take the longest time to prepare of any dinner component, and whole grain starches take the longest of all. Most of us know we should eat more whole grains, but we can’t spare the 45 to 60 minutes they take to prepare from scratch every night. The solution? Make a big pot of a whole grain starch like brown rice over the weekend when you have a bit more time, then reheat portions of it as your dinner starch during the week. While you don’t have to resort to it every night, it’s a great option to have if you’re running late and would otherwise reach for highly processed convenience food instead.


Something I didn’t know about when I first described this default in the No S Diet book is resistant starch. Basically, it’s the result of a natural chemical process whereby certain common starchy foods (like white rice and pasta) have their simple starch restructured into a form that resists digestion when they cook and cool, making them function a lot like fiber in whole grains. So basically leftover white rice after a night in the fridge becomes, from a nutritional perspective, a lot closer to brown rice: slower to digest, with less pronounced rapid blood sugar spikes, better for your gut all around. Same thing with pasta. So if you (or your kids) hate brown rice and whole wheat pasta, this is a good thing to know. Convenience engineer up a batch for a quick and actually not that bad for you reheat.




________________






My next IDDs are drink-related. Drinks (except drinks enough added sugar to count as dessert level sweets) are not formally restricted by the No S diet itself. But they often do have calories. And sometimes alcohol. And they always have an impact on how you eat. So it can be helpful to have some defaults around them too.


IDD#6: Cuppa Joe Noir. Of all drugs, caffeine is my favorite, and coffee my favorite caffeine delivery vehicle. It would definitely be my desert island vice. But it’s not even a vice! Coffee is one of those things that seems like it should be bad, like cigarettes or booze, but it isn’t actually. On the contrary it’s loaded with antioxidants and even fiber (remember it’s made out of “beans!”). 


All kinds of coffee are permitted on no-s, unless it’s a double mocha dessert masquerading as a coffee. But why not skip the stress of worrying about sugar or calories in your coffee entirely and just enjoy it black, at least as a default? Black coffee has this tough guy vibe that’s very appealing. In a strange way you increase its reward value by keeping it black. Cuppa Joe Noir has you lean into that, you kind of imagine you’re this hard boiled detective in one of those old movies, staking out a case at the counter of an all-night-diner like in Edward Hopper’s Nighthawks. 


Caffeine is a natural appetite suppressant. It’s got ritual value to distract you from sticking other things in your mouth. Drink it black and you don’t need to worry about all those sugar packets and half-and-halves adding up, no matter how often you indulge. You can basically drink infinite coffee without having to worry about it (at least, calorically).


If you currently dump all kinds of extras in your coffee, I get it, this is a big switch. And I sometimes will indulge in those too, though I’ve really come to mostly prefer my coffee black. I’d encourage you to give it a try. As with black bread, it’s a taste worth making some effort to acquire if you can. 


IDD#7: Tea Person. Mornings, I am very much a coffee person. I need that powerful hit of caffeine to charge into the day. But afternoons I’m ready for a break. Not just in terms of flavor, but in terms of vibe. It’s serene time. It’s ramp down time. It’s remember you’re going to eventually have to go to bed time. Then I switch to tea. I switch to a whole new persona. From Joe Noir to Tea Person. By default, as with coffee, I stick with the unsweetened kind. I find green teas and roasted rice teas work really well on their own. It doesn’t feel like anything is missing. Many of the same benefits as coffee in terms of ritual, PM-appropriate amounts of caffeine, and since tea has its own distinct set of purported miracle nutrients, I’m hedging my bets – or at least I would be if I put much stock in such things.  


IDD#8: Pilsner Urknall or one-two punch. This is my last IDD, and takes us to the edge of another system, Glass Ceiling. On days when I’m drinking alcohol, just S-days these days, I try to lead with a small low ABV beverage. One of my favorite beers, Pilsner Urquell, hits both these criteria, just 4.4% ABV in an 11.2 ounce bottle, and I happen to love it. Urknall means big bang in German (though it’s more of a whimper in this case). The idea is that by starting small, 1) it keeps me from having two larger drinks by filling up that first slot with something modest and 2) it often makes my second drink less large as well because my judgement is less clouded than it might have been after a larger leading drink. The “one-two punch” image is from boxing, when you lead with a light jab to distract your opponent and follow up with a powerful cross. But in this case, the lighter the jab, the lighter the follow-up is likely to be as well. It sets you up for a calibrated second punch. In winter months, I’ll sometimes substitute a Guinness for a Pilsner Urquel, which has similar properties, but feels more warming. 


________________




Well, that’s it: Intelligent Dietary Defaults, 2026.


I’ll close with a quote from my initial episode, which I still stand behind, and is important not to forget as you are experimenting with your own defaults:


There's a saying in the computer world that "premature optimization is the root of all evil." In other words, don't start optimizing until you have a good sense of the problem, until your program more or less does what it's supposed to, or you're going to waste massive effort on relatively insignificant details. Right? Get to good before you worry about better or best. In the case of diet, the issue of excessive eating, pure and simple, is the giant heart of the problem, and you shouldn't let fine tuning like this distract you from that. No S Diet first, or your preferred equivalent for managing excess, and only then intelligent defaults and optimization.


That’s all for today. Thanks for listening.
